Technical
Descriptions
(Mechanism
and Process)
ENCS 282

Technical Descriptions
It is all about painting complex pictures with words
 Focus and level relate to your purpose and the needs of the audience
 Ask these questions
 What is it?
 What does it do?
 What does it look like?
 What is it made of?
 How does it work?
 How was it put together

Technical Descriptions
Give an impartial view
 Avoid subjective impressions
 Focus on observable details
 “The table is a bad table” vs “The table is crooked and seems quite old. The
wood is slightly destroyed in the middle and makes an odd sound. Apart from
the fact that it is shaking a lot, one of the legs is broken.”

 Use precise language
 “An old model” vs “Honda Acura 2008 model”

Mechanism Description
 What is it?
 What is its function? What does it look like?
 What are its principal components?

How to do Mechanism Description
 Visual walkabout. Describe the object in the order of a single visual sweep.
You could work from top to bottom or around the object without jumping.
 System breakdown. Identify parts based on the relationships between
those parts. This approach considers connections and interactions
between components. (Note: This approach could be used to describe the
conceptual layout of an application which passes information between
various components in the system.)
 Core-to-periphery. Identify the most important attributes before moving
to less significant ones.

Mechanism Description Notes
 Dimensions: marked on the diagram and noted in the description
 Shapes: described to help the reader locate and visualize
components
 Position: written precisely (example: “immediately to the right…”)
 Colour and texture: described only if these are significant
 Purpose and function: noted for the object or system as a whole
and for individual components

Visuals and Style
 Visuals are an essential complement to any mechanism description.
Therefore, you should actively refer to an appropriately labelled
figure.
 Style
 Write short, focused paragraphs.
 Use a direct, conversational tone, without colloquial language.

Process Description
• Where, when, why, and how does the process occur?
• What is the environment in which the process takes place?
• What are the principal stages of the process?
• What are the applications of the process?

Process: Introduction
 Start with the “big picture,” naming and defining the process, and
noting special features.
 Describe where, when, why, and how the process occurs. • Provide
essential background information.
 List the main stages or actions of the process

Process: Stages
 Describe stages in detail and in chronological order.
 Relate individual stages to those that precede and follow.
 Provide applicable measurements of time, distance, direction,
density, volume, etc

Process: Conclusion
 Make statements about the overall process, leading to practical
considerations: time, cost, applications, problems and limitations,
results

Visuals and Style
 Visuals are essential to any process description. Therefore, you
should include and actively refer to an appropriately labelled figure.
 Style
 Write short, focused paragraphs.
 Use precise, accurate vocabulary.
 In general, use the indicative mood for process stages. (e.g., The next stage
takes three hours…)
 Choose active voice (e.g., “The signal travels…”) or passive voice (e.g., “The
signal is next transferred to the filtering stage…”) to maintain cohesion and
flow.

